# The HomeSpan Command-Line Interface (CLI)

HomeSpan includes a light-weight Command-Line Interface (CLI) for developers that can be accessed via the Arduino Serial Monitor whenever your Homespan device is connected to a computer by selecting *Tools → Serial Monitor* from the top menu bar of the Arduino IDE.  The HomeSpan CLI allows you view real-time HomeSpan diagnostics, query the device's operating status, inspect its HAP database, and perform some basic functions, such as initiating a Factory Reset.  Most importantly, the CLI can be used to configure HomeSpan's network connectivity and its HomeKit Setup Code.

#### WiFi Credentials and HomeKit Setup Codes

Though HomeSpan devices can be used on a standalone basis, to control the a HomeSpan device through Apple HomeKit (which is the whole point of HomeSpan), the device needs to be connected to a WiFi network.  This means HomeSpan needs to know your home WiFi network name and WiFi password. HomeSpan refers to these are your *WiFi Credentials*.  Rather then requiring you to hardcode your WiFi Credentials as part of every HomeSpan sketch (which is neither secure nor easy to update), HomeSpan stores your WiFi Credentials in a non-volatile storage (NVS) partition in the ESP32 that is reserved as part of the flash memory on the device, similar to how an EEPROM would operate.  You can set, change, and even erase, the WiFi Credentials stored on any HomeSpan device directly from the HomeSpan CLI without ever modifying the code, or even having access to the code.

Every HomeSpan device also requires an 8-digit Setup Code to be able to pair to Apple HomeKit.  This code is similarly stored in an NVS partition rather than hardcoded into a HomeSpan sketch.  When HomeSpan is run for the first time on a new device, it configures itself with a default code of **466-37-72**.  This can be changed any time from the HomeSpan CLI.
